Raju is a Hindu born and brought up in Bengaluru, India. But he does not have any document to prove the citizenship. Will he be given citizenship under CAA?
No he will not. The CAA is not a substitute for lack of documents. He must produce the required documents show he is an Indian. Or he must produce documents to show he is from Pakistan, Bangladesh or Afghanistan. Born and brought up in India, if Raju cannot produce documents to prove as an Indian it would only be harder for him to  prove that he is from Pakistan 

Iqbal is a Muslim born in Bangladesh. He migrated to India in 1973 for some reason. Now that Hindus from Bangladesh are given citizenship under CAA he converts to Hinduism and starts practicing Hindu religion. Will he be given citizenship under CAA?
No, he will not be given. Because he was not a 'persecuted' minority when he emmigrated from Bangladesh. 

Sanjay and Rahim were born and brought up in Kochi. They are close friends. Sanjay is Hindu while Rahim is a Muslim. Does Rahim face greater difficulty to prove his citizenship compared to Sanjay?
No, Sanjay is not an immigrant. So he will have same procedure to prove his citizenship as Rahim.

Rahul and Rashid were born in Dhaka. They emigrated to India in 2009. Rahul is Hindu while Rashid is a Muslim. Will Rashid face greater difficulty to gain Indian citizenship compared to Rahul?
Yes, of course. Rahul belonged to a religious minority. Rashid did not. Rahul should provide documents to prove his religion and that he is from Bangladesh. Rahul will be given citizenship under CAA. His minimum number of years to naturalise will be reduced from 11 years to 6 years. As he has completed 6 years of residence in India he will be given citizenship. Rashid has to face other routes for citizenship.




Mohammed is a Muslim born in India. 

His parents are not Indian Citizens. They emigrated legally from UAE to Kerala for some reason. Mohammed stayed in India all his life. Will he be stripped of because his parents are not Indian citizens?



Mohammed is a Muslim born in Kerala in 1977. His parents are not Indian Citizens. They emigrated legally from UAE to Kerala for some reason. Mohammed stayed in India all his life. Will he be stripped of because his parents are not Indian citizens?
No, the stringent NRC is only applicable in Assam due to the Assam Accord.



Had some conversation with some of Muslim friends who were genuinely concerned about NRC and CAA. Thought I will make some example cases that can solve the confusion about the same. I have done my best to verify the cases. I discussed with a lawyer, a UPSC aspirant, a Government consultant and a anti-CAA Activist. In case there are any corrections to be made please mention in the comments.

Case 1 : Raju is a Hindu born and brought up in India. But he does not have any document to prove the citizenship. Will he be given citizenship under CAA?

No he will not. The CAA is not a substitute for lack of documents. He must produce the required documents show he is an Indian. Or he must produce documents to show he is from Pakistan, Bangladesh or Afghanistan. Born and brought up in India, if Raju cannot produce documents to prove as an Indian it would only be harder for him to  prove that he is from Pak/Afg or Bangla. So, exploitation of CAA by the Indian Hindus is ruled out.

Case 2 : Iqbal is a Muslim born in Bangladesh. He migrated to India in 1973 for some reason. Now that Hindus from Bangladesh are given citizenship under CAA he converts to Hinduism and starts practising Hindu religion. Will he be given citizenship under CAA?

No, he will not be given. Because he was not a 'persecuted' minority when he emigrated from Bangladesh. 

Case 3 : Sanjay and Rahim were born and brought up in Kochi. They are close friends. Sanjay is Hindu while Rahim is a Muslim. Does Rahim face greater difficulty to prove his citizenship compared to Sanjay?

No, Sanjay is not an immigrant. So he will have same procedure to prove his citizenship as Rahim.

Case 4 : Rahul and Rashid were born in Dhaka. They emigrated to Bihar, India in 2009. Rahul is Hindu while Rashid is a Muslim. Will Rashid face greater difficulty to gain Indian citizenship compared to Rahul?

Yes, of course. Rahul belonged to a religious minority. Rashid did not. Rahul should provide documents to prove his religion and that he is from Bangladesh. Rahul will be given citizenship under CAA. His minimum number of years to naturalise will be reduced from 11 years to 6 years. As he has completed 6 years of residence in India he will be given citizenship. Rashid has to face other routes for citizenship.

-----------
Some FAQs

1. Is NRC+CAA discriminatory towards Muslims? 

Ans : For immigrants - Yes. CAA will provide advantage for an non-Muslim compared to a Muslim.
For Indian Citizens - No. Both Indian Muslims and Indian Non-Muslims should face NRC alike.

2. Can stringent NRC be used to selectively strip the citizenship of Muslims?
Ans : No, same as above.

----------
Why are the protests?

Protests in Assam : People in Assam do not want the immigrants to settle permanently in Assam. This makes the Assamese a ethnic minority in their own land.

Protests in Delhi and other places : Genuine reason - non-inclusion of 



